Restructure Api Gateway Documentation (#13675)
hashicorp/consul: website/content/docs/api-gateway/configuration/gateway.mdx

        * [`namespace`](#listeners-tls): string | required if `certificateRefs` is declared
      * [`mode`](#listeners-tls): string | required if `certificateRefs` is declared
      * [`options`](#listeners-tls): map of strings | optional

## Specification

This topic provides details about the configuration parameters.

### gatewayClassName
Specifies the name of the [`GatewayClass`](/docs/api-gateway/configuration/gatewayclass) resource used for the `Gateway` instance. Unless you are using a custom [GatewayClass](/docs/api-gateway/configuration/gatewayclass), this value should be set to `consul-api-gateway`.
* Type: string
* Required: required

### listeners
Specifies the `listeners` associated with the `Gateway`. At least one `listener` must be specified. Each `listener` within a `Gateway` must have a unique combination of `hostname`, `port`, and `protocol`.
* Type: array of objects
* Required: required

### listeners.allowedRoutes
Specifies a `namespace` object that defines the types of routes that may be attached to a listener.
* Type: object
* Required: required

### listeners.allowedRoutes.namespaces

> Determines which routes are allowed to attach to the `listener`. Only routes in the same namespace as the `Gateway` may be attached by default.

Author: ```suggestion
Determines which routes are allowed to attach to the `listener`. Only routes in the same namespace as the `Gateway` may be attached by default.
* Type: string
* Required: optional
* Default:  Same namespace as the parent Gateway
```

        * [`key`](#listeners-namespaces-selector-matchExpressions-key): string | required if matchExpressions is declared
        * [`operator`](#listeners.namespaces-selector-operator): string | required if matchExpressions is declared
        * [`values`](#listeners.namespaces-selector-values): array of strings | required if matchExpressions is declared
      * [`matchLabels`](#listeners-namespaces-selector-matchLabels): map of strings | required if matchExpressions is not configured
  * [`hostname`](#listeners-hostname): string | required
  * [`name`](#listeners-name): string | required
  * [`port`](#listeners-port): integer | required
  * [`protocol`](#listeners-protocol)`: string | required
  * [`tls`](#listeners-tls): object | required if protocol is set to HTTPS
      * [`certificateRefs`](#listeners-tls-certificateRefs): array or objects | required if tls is declared
        * [`name`](#listeners-tls-certificateRefs-name): string | required if certificateRefs is declared
        * [`namespace`](#listeners-tls-certificateRefs-namespace): string | required if certificateRefs is declared
      * [`mode`](#listeners-tls-mode): string | required if certificateRefs is declared

>       * [`options`](#listeners-tls-options): map of strings | optional

Author: Resolving because this appears to have been fixed in a later commit

---
layout: docs
page_title: Consul API Gateway Gateway
description:  >-
  Consul API Gateway Gateway
---

> # Gateway

Reviewer: This particular page needs a bit of help on formatting - the tables should likely use inline `code` formatting for parameters and have all columns left-aligned, and the Configuration Model section (and possibly the individual sections under Specification?) could maybe benefit from formatting similar to https://www.consul.io/docs/k8s/helm to make it easier to scan.

Reviewer 2: I think the table should be all left-aligned. The different alignment in each column is kinda jarring.

<img width="943" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/7556325/180494559-45aa27ee-e514-4168-844e-5854793db656.png">

While I agree that this new config model is easier to scan, we should update the links so they jump to the correct section -- that may lead to a better experience.

## Introduction

A `Gateway` is an instance of network infrastructure that determines how service traffic should be handled. A `Gateway` contains one or more `listeners` that bind to a set of IP addresses. An `HTTPRoute` or `TCPRoute` can then attach to a gateway listener to direct traffic from the gateway to a service.

Gateway instances derive their configurations from the `GatewayClass` resource, which acts as a template for individual `Gateway` deployments. Refer to [GatewayClass](/docs/api-gateway/configuration/gatewayclass) for additional information.

Specify the following parameters to declare a Gateway:

|  Parameter  |                                                                         Description                                                                        | Required |
|:-----------:|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------:|:--------:|
| kind        | Specifies the type of configuration object. The value should always be Gateway                                                                             | Required |

> | description | Human-readable string for describing the purpose of the Gateway.                                                                                           | Optional |

Reviewer 3: I'd probably move the optional parameter(s) to the end of the list

* listeners: array of objects | required
  * allowedRoutes: object | required
  * namespaces: object | required
    * from: string | required
    * selector: object | required if from is configured to selector
      * matchExpressions: array of objects | required if matchLabels is not configured
        * key: string | required if matchExpressions is declared
        * operator: string | required if matchExpressions is declared
        * values: array of strings | required if matchExpressions is declared
      * matchLabels: map of strings | required if matchExpressions is not configured
  * hostname: string | required
  * name: string | required
  * port: integer | required
  * protocol: string | required
  * tls: object | required if protocol is set to HTTPS
      * certificateRefs: array or objects | required if tls is declared
        * name: string | required if certificateRefs is declared
        * namespace: string | required if certificateRefs is declared
      * mode: string | required if certificateRefs is declared
      * options: map of strings | optional

## Specification

This topic provides details about the configuration parameters

### gatewayClassName

> Specifies the name of the `GatewayClass` resource used for the `Gateway` instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Specifies the name of the [`GatewayClass`](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/v1alpha2/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2.GatewayClass) resource used for the `Gateway` instance.
```

> Specifies the name of the `GatewayClass` resource used for the `Gateway` instance.

Reviewer: Did you mean to `api-gateway/configuration/gatewayclass` or https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/v1alpha2/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2.GatewayClass

> Specifies the name of the `GatewayClass` resource used for the `Gateway` instance.

Reviewer 3: I think linking to the local documentation at `api-gateway/configuration/gatewayclass` is fine

* Required: required

### listeners
Specifies the `listeners` associated with the `Gateway`. At least one `listener` must be specified. Each `listener` within a `Gateway` must have a unique combination of `hostname`, `port`, and `protocol`.

* Type: array of objects
* Required: required

### listeners.allowedRoutes
Specifies a `namespace` object that defines the types of routes that may be attached to a listener.
* Type: object
* Required: required

### listeners.allowedRoutes.namespaces
Determines which routes are allowed to attach to the `listener`. Only routes in the same namespace as the `Gateway` may be attached by default.

### listeners.allowedRoutes.namespaces.from
Specifies the policy for which namespaces a route may attach to a `Gateway` from. Defaults to `Same`.

This parameter has the following properties:
* Type: string
* Required: required

You can specify one of the following strings:
* All: Routes in all namespaces may be attached to the Gateway.
* Same: Only routes in the same namespace as the Gateway may be attached.
* Selector: Only routes in namespaces that match the selector configuration may be attached.

### listeners.allowedRoutes.namespaces.selector

> The `selector` configuration matches zero or more namespaces that determine which routes are allowed to attach to the listener.

Reviewer 3: I'd rephrase to match the structure of the other sections:

```suggestion
Specifies a method of matching namespaces from which routes are allowed to attach to the listener.
```

* Type: Object
* Required: Required when from is configured to selector.

The selector configuration contains one of the following objects:

> * matchExpressions
> * matchLabels

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* `matchExpressions`
* `matchLabels`
```

| scope       | Specifies the effective scope of the Gateway. The value should always be namespaced.                                                                                                                                                                   | Required         |
| fields      | Specifies the configurations for the Gateway. The fields are listed in the Configuration model. Details for each field are described in the Specification.                                                                                             | Required         |

```yaml
namespaceSelector:
  matchExpressions:
  - key: kubernetes.io/metadata.name
    operator: In
    values:
    - foo
    - bar
```

### listeners.allowedRoutes.namespaces.selector.matchLabels
Specifies an array of labels and label values. If a match is found, then routes with the matching label(s) are allowed to attach to the `Gateway`. This selector can contain any arbitrary key/value pair.

```yaml
namespaceSelector:
    matchLabels:
      foo: bar
```

For more on labels, see [Labels and Selectors](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/labels/)

### listeners.hostname

> Specifies the `listeners` hostname

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Specifies the `listener`'s hostname
```

Reviewer 3: Is there any information we could provide about what the `hostname` is used for?

* Type: string
* Required: required

### listeners.name

> Specifies the `listeners` name

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Specifies the `listener`'s name
```

* Type: string
* Required: required

### listeners.port
Specifies the port number that the `listener` will attach to
* Type: integer
* Required: required

### listeners.protocol
Specifies the protocol the `listener` will use
* Type: string
* Required: required

> Allowed values `TCP`, `HTTP`, `HTTPS`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Allowed values are `TCP`, `HTTP`, or `HTTPS`
```

### listeners.tls
* Type: Object

> * Required: required if protocol is set to HTTPS

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Required: required if `protocol` is set to `HTTPS`
```

### listeners.tls.certificateRefs
`CertificateRefs` contains a series of references to Kubernetes objects that contains TLS certificates and private keys. These certificates are used to establish a TLS handshake for requests that match the hostname of the associated `listener`. Each reference must be a Kubernetes Secret, and, if using a Secret in a namespace other than the`Gateway`'s, must have a corresponding `ReferencePolicy` created.
* Type: Object or Array

> * Required: required if tls is set

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Required: required if `tls` is set
```

### listeners.tls.mode
* Type: String
* Required: required if certificateRefs is set

### listeners.tls.options
* Type: Map of Strings
* Required: optional

## Complete configuration

> The following example shows a fully configured Gateway.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following example shows a fully configured `Gateway`.
```

### listeners.allowedRoutes.namespaces.selector.matchExpressions
Specifies an array of requirements for matching namespaces. If a match is found, then routes from the matching namespace(s) are allowed to attach to the `Gateway`. The following table describes members of the `matchExpressions` array:

| Requirement | Description | Type | Required |
|--- |--- |--- |--- |
|`key` | Specifies the label that the `key` applies to. | string | required when `matchExpressions` is declared |
|`operator` | Specifies the key's relation to a set of values. You can use the following keywords: <ul><li>`In`: Only routes in namespaces that contain the strings in the `values` field can attach to the `Gateway`. </li><li>`NotIn`: Routes in namespaces that do not contain the strings in the `values` field can attach to the `Gateway`. </li><li>`Exists`: Routes in namespaces that contain the `key` value are allowed to attach to the `Gateway`.</li><li>`DoesNotExist`: Routes in namespaces that do not contain the `key` value are allowed to attach to the `Gateway`.</li></ul> | string | required when `matchExpressions` is declared |

> |`values` | Specifies an array of string values. If `operator` is configured to `In` or `NotIn`, then the `values` array must contain values. If `operator` is configured to `Exists` or `DoesNotExist`, then the `values` array must be empty. This array is replaced during a strategic merge patch. | array of strings | required when `matchExpressions` is declared |

Author: Given that this is a kubernetes api object and I'm confused about what that sentence is expressing too, I'm going to delete the sentence and add a link to the kubernetes documentation at the bottom.

  - key: kubernetes.io/metadata.name
    operator: In
    values:
    - foo
    - bar
```

### listeners.allowedRoutes.namespaces.selector.matchLabels
Specifies an array of labels and label values. If a match is found, then routes with the matching label(s) are allowed to attach to the `Gateway`. This selector can contain any arbitrary key/value pair.

In the following example, routes in namespaces that have a `bar` label are allowed to attach to the `Gateway`.

```yaml
namespaceSelector:
    matchLabels:
      foo: bar
```

Refer to [Labels and Selectors](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/labels/) in the Kubernetes documentation for additional information about labels.

### listeners.hostname
Specifies the `listener`'s hostname.
* Type: string
* Required: required

### listeners.name
Specifies the `listener`'s name.
* Type: string
* Required: required

### listeners.port
Specifies the port number that the `listener` attaches to.
* Type: integer
* Required: required

### listeners.protocol
Specifies the protocol the `listener` communicates on.
* Type: string
* Required: required

Allowed values are `TCP`, `HTTP`, or `HTTPS`

### listeners.tls

> Specifies the `tls` configurations for the `Gateway`. The `tls` object is required if `protocol` is set to `HTTPS`. The object contains the following fields:

Reviewer 4: @im2nguyen - the allowedRoutes section has several levels of children and isn't conducive to being formatted in the same way. Tables are nicer, but the information they describe has to be relatively flat. We went with a table in this case because the children node only has one dependent that can easily appear in the table. I don't think you can do that with nodes higher in the configuration model.

* Type: string
* Required: required

### listeners.port
Specifies the port number that the `listener` attaches to.
* Type: integer
* Required: required

### listeners.protocol
Specifies the protocol the `listener` communicates on.
* Type: string
* Required: required

Allowed values are `TCP`, `HTTP`, or `HTTPS`

### listeners.tls
Specifies the `tls` configurations for the `Gateway`. The `tls` object is required if `protocol` is set to `HTTPS`. The object contains the following fields:

| Parameter | Description | Type | Required |
| ---       | ---         | ---  | ---      |
| `certificateRefs` | <div style={{width:480}}>Specifies Kubernetes `name` and `namespace` objects that contains TLS certificates and private keys. <br/>The certificates establish a TLS handshake for requests that match the `hostname` of the associated `listener`. Each reference must be a Kubernetes Secret. If you are using a Secret in a namespace other than the `Gateway`'s, each reference must also have a corresponding [`ReferencePolicy`](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/v1alpha2/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2.ReferencePolicy).</div>  | Object or array | Required if `tls` is set |

> | `mode` | Specifies the ? | string | Required if `certificateRefs` is set |
> | `options` | ??? | Map of strings | optional |
> 
> In the following example, `tls` settings are configured . . .
> 
> ```yaml
> 
> tls:
>   certificateRefs: 
>     name: ?
>     namespace: ?
>   mode: ?
>   options: 
>   - ?
>   - ? 
>   - ?

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| `mode` | Specifies the ? | string | Required if `certificateRefs` is set |
| `options` | ??? | Map of strings | optional |

In the following example, `tls` settings are configured . . .

```yaml

tls:
  certificateRefs: 
    name: ?
    namespace: ?
  mode: ?
  options: 
  - ?
  - ? 
  - ?
```
Flagging this as a section that needs some help. I don't know what the `mode` option is or what the values are.

Author: I had to reverse engineer some code, but I added some additional context. I would raise TLS Options as a section that could do with an additional PR focused solely on improving the clarity of those settings.
